+++
title = "GSoC status report 1"
date = "2023-06-03"
+++

The first week of GSoC is over! I'm working on presentation scheduling in
wlroots. Here's how it's going.
<!-- more -->

## The Task
Currenly in wlroots, the easy and obvious frame schedule for compositors to
implement is one where Wayland clients and the compositor are both told to
render a new frame as soon as the last one makes it to the screen. This means
that clients are almost guaranteed to miss the deadline for this cycle, and
their frame submissions will only make it into the compositor's renderer in the
next cycle. With this schedule, there are two frames of latency between a client
receiving some user input and the new content making it to the screen.

If the compositor starts rendering later then clients are more likely to have
submitted the frame that was most recently triggered. The tradeoff is that the
compositor is less likely to hit its own deadline. It's like the computer is
playing The Price Is Right for every frame, and I'm in control of how it
guesses.

I'm trying to make a smarter frame schedule (where the computer is really good
at the game) be another easy and obvious schedule for wlroots compositors to
use, so the whole ecosystem can win without having to faff about implementing it
themselves.

Thanks to [Simon][0] for the idea and for mentoring me.

## This week
I quickly implemented [a way for compositors to delay rendering][1] by a
specified number of milliseconds, and Kenny quickly pointed out that the way I
did it was silly. Since then, I have a much better understanding of what
actually happens for each frame in wlroots. Thanks Kenny!

After that review and a bit more discussion I gave it another go, but didn't
submit it yet because I havent't finished polishing it. While I was doing that,
I was brutally reminded that the C compiler does not care about me and will not
attempt to help at all. Don't forget to enable your sanitizers, reader. Arguably
I deserved it, because I had recently commented on how I was enjoying writing C
for a change. Don't fall into the same trap as me; C does not want you to enjoy
it.

I also wrote [a new API][2] that allows you to find out how long it took to
render a frame. For now, this is only implemented on the GLES2 backend. Storing
this time for the last few frames is a good way to make an educated guess on the
time for the next one, and by also knowing your monitor's (maximum) refresh rate
you can come up with a reasonable duration to delay rendering by.

In testing the render timer I discovered that my test machine takes a whopping 4
milliseconds to paint the screen a solid colour. A valuable lesson lies here:
don't ask questions if you're not strong enough to hear the answer. Or maybe
"damage tracking is good".

See you next week!

[0]: <https://emersion.fr>
[1]: <https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/wlroots/wlroots/-/merge_requests/4147>
[2]: <https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/wlroots/wlroots/-/merge_requests/4159>
