+++
title = "GSoC status report 2"
date = "2023-06-17"
+++

The world tried to stop me, but I pushed through and got some work done on
wlroots.
<!-- more -->

## Hurdles
Unfortunately aside from programming I have a physical form that I have to take
care of. Recently this form's hands have been hurting because of strain from
typing, which is pretty rude of them, so I took some time out to build [a
keyboard][kyria]. Woe is me, having to spend my time soldering and cutting. I
had a great time. After finishing the keyboard, all of a sudden it was time to
move out, so we packed and shuffled and drove and unpacked and complained about
the trains in this country. Then I slept, and yesterday I finally found the time
to get back to work. This is why there was no update last week.

## Progress
I've decided that I need consistent terms for the subtasks I have. So:
*measurement* is reading how long a frame takes to render, *prediction* is
coming up with a number of milliseconds, and *scheduling* is delaying by that
number and all the API funk therein. It turns out that Simon was right and there
is a lot of API funk for me to deal with. We've had some discussions about [what
exactly `wlr_output.events.frame` is for][frame] and whether we really need it,
and I've [implemented a scheduling mechanism][scheduling] based on that signal
to show how we can make good use of it.

[Bringing together][experiments] this scheduling, the timer from the first
status report for measurement, and some naive prediction (next frame takes at
most 1ms more than last frame) christens tinywl as the first user of all this
mess. Here are some screenshots from [GPUVis] showing the old, boring timeline
where we rendered immediately after the last present, and the new, sexy timeline
where we render immediately before the next one! The purple lines are vblanks,
and the boxes in each row represent durations when those processes were running
on the CPU. I think blue lines are GPU submissions, but the naming is unclear.

{{ resize_image(path="/gsoc23/tinywl-before.png", width=0, height=80, op="fit_height") }}
{{ resize_image(path="/gsoc23/tinywl-after.png", width=0, height=80, op="fit_height") }}

Wow, isn't that beautiful.

[kyria]: <https://splitkb.com/collections/keyboard-kits/products/kyria-rev3-pcb-kit>
[frame]: <https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/wlroots/wlroots/-/issues/3664>
[scheduling]: <https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/rosefromthedead/wlroots/-/tree/scheduling>
[experiments]: <https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/rosefromthedead/wlroots/-/tree/experiments>
[GPUVis]: <https://github.com/mikesart/gpuvis>
